= Ribs - A Ruby ORM using Hibernate

The current ORM approaches for Ruby include ActiveRecord, DataMapper
and RBatis. None of these have the versatility and power that
Hibernate gives to any Java project. Ribs is a new interpretation of
the idea ActiveHibernate, which was proposed in a blog post
here[http://olabini.com/blog/2007/04/activehibernate-any-takers/]. The
original name didn't really suit, though, since it was based on the
ActiveRecord name, and Ribs will end up being something quite
different.

So what is Ribs? It's a Ruby framework written for JRuby, that allows
you to use Hibernate to persist your Ruby objects. There are many
things planned for Ribs, but currently it only supports quite basic
operations.

Ribs is explicitly defined to solve several data access patterns for
most Ruby development. In one end it means scaling down from something
very much like ActiveRecord, but on the other end supports such things
as Repository, Data Mapper, Unit of Work and Identity Map.

== Definitions

To get started, you first need to define a database connection for
Ribs to use. In most cases you only have one, but Ribs doesn't
preclude you defining several and using them in different places. The
code for doing that looks like this:

  Ribs::DB.define do |db|
    db.dialect = 'Derby'
    db.uri = 'jdbc:derby:test_database;create=true'
    db.driver = 'org.apache.derby.jdbc.EmbeddedDriver'
  end

You can also provide username, password, and other properties that
will be passed through to Hibernate. Currently, Derby is the only
database tested against, but most of the features used are totally
database independent, and Hibernate shields Ribs from most of the
rest.

See the define method and the Ribs::DB class for more information on
what's available.

To actually make a Ruby class a database backed objects, you use the
method {Kernel#Ribs!}[link:classes/Kernel.html#M000038] In the simple
case you don't need to actually provide any configuration, but support
is available for renaming columns, deciding which one is the primary
key, and also avoid making columns part of the object. The simplest
case looks like this:

  class Blog
  end

That is more or less the same as doing
  
  class Blog
    Ribs!
  end

This method call will not do anything that won't be done implicitly at
the first usage of it as a Ribs model. This means that if you follow
conventions exactly, you don't need to configure anything at all.

It can also be written as:

  class Blog; end

  Ribs! :on => Blog

There is no need to actually have the Ribs definition inside of the
model class. You can define that a model should go against a specific
database definition if you want - by default it will use the default
database.

In the above example, the table name backing the model will be assumed
to be "blog". Case is not important here. Ribs tries to find the table
no matter what.

To redefine which table to use, the names of the columns, and where
the primary key is, you need to provide a block to the {Ribs!}[link:classes/Kernel.html#M000038] method:

  class Blog
    Ribs! :table => :blogs do |r|
      r.blog_id.primary_key!

      r.blog_title :column => :title

      r.irrelevant_column.avoid!
    end
  end

This code will back the model against the "blogs" table, have the
column name blog_id represent the primary key, and map the column
title to the property blog_title. Finally, avoid! tells Ribs
to avoid a specific column, so it won't try to map that.

If you have a primary key that you want to have a different name, or a
column you want to avoid but it's not nullable, you can use these
variations instead:

  class Blog
    Ribs! :table => :blogs do |r|
      r.blog_id :primary_key, :column => :id

      r.irrelevant_column :avoid, :default => "value to insert:
    end
  end

Currently Ribs only supports simple data types. It doesn't include
associations, and have no support for setting default values, or
constraints in the definitions. It's not possible to set the types in
the definitions either.

== Usage

Once you have a defined model, you can work with it in several
different ways.

If you want to create new instances you can do it much like with
ActiveRecord, except that you always need to surround a call to
anything regarding the database with an invocation to the method
R. This method takes either a class or an instance, and returns a
repository proxy for the argument. You can also send in a specific
database name if you want to work with another database then the
default one.:

  blog = Blog.new
  blog.blog_id = 1
  blog.blog_title = "Foobar"
  R(blog).save

The new-method returned from R can take the parameters as a hash of
symbols too:

  blog = R(Blog).new(
    :blog_id => 1,
    :blog_title => "Foobar")
  R(blog).save

And as a short hand a create method is available:

  blog = R(Blog).create(
    :blog_id => 1,
    :blog_title => "Foobar")

To find a specific entry:

  blog = R(Blog).get(1)

Or to find all entries:

  blogs = R(Blog).all

To update an entry:
  
  blog.blog_title = "New title"
  R(blog).save

To destroy an existing entry:

  R(blog).destroy!

Or to destroy it based on id:
 
  R(Blog).destroy(1)

== License

Ribs is released under the MIT license.
